# Machinery

This is a set of projects that help keep the digital past alive.

## Development

This repository is a monorepo using turborepo and pnpm.

If you have `corepack` already installed, you can more or less build everything with the
following command:

```
corepack enable pnpm
pnpm install
pnpm build
```

This might take a while since it must build assemblers and then perform assembly of various
test files as part of the normal build. The simulators also require the parser grammar to
be built from within `virtual-machine`, etc, which can take a little bit of time on some
machines.

## Objective

The motivation behind this project and any that are associated with it is to provide a modern
set of tools for systems projects related to older hardware and reverse engineering. This
repository houses most of the functionality that deals with assembly, disassembly, and
simulation/emulation of hardware across a variety of platforms. It does this by generalizing
the description of hardware such that it can generate the various tools efficently for each
platform from these basic descriptions.

By creating generators instead of bespoke emulators, the bet is placed that performance is
not the primary concern: the quality of the tooling is more important for reverse engineering
efforts. However, by generalizing the tools, we also benefit from any improvements or advanced
techniques being added to one will generally lift all other platforms as well. At the end of
the day, the emphasis is placed on a correct and thorough description of device behavior first
and performance second.

## Platform Descriptions

The `core` package contains the types that define the schemata used by much of the rest of the
system to describe hardware behavior. The main component of this is the `Target` schema. This
holds the often complex metadata for a platform target.

Here, a target can be described by its human-legible metadata and by its more mechanically-minded
data such as a map of its registers and memory, including subfields and hints to identify memory
regions the system might be using and what the layout of those regions should be.

Of course, the target description also exhaustively lists the possible modes that the hardware
might run in and, for processors within the `processors` package, what set of instructions might
be encoded and their expected behaviors. These operations are written in code that can be parsed
to generated efficient simulations of those instructions by a variety of generator backends to
produce code in TypeScript and/or WebAssembly through the `virtual-machine` package.

## Simulator Generation

The `virtual-machine` package can generate code that efficiently simulates the described hardware.

One objective is to ensure that new emulators do not need to be written for new hardware or
programming environments. To that end, the simulators are not hand-written. They are generated by
parsing the operation code, that's written in a simple language, and transforming it into
different forms of real-world programming languages. Currently, it can generate a TypeScript
machine class and a WebAssembly-based version.

This simulation code can be used for full emulation of some machine class or aid in reverse
engineering by helping run sections of code to determine the behavior for the purposes of
analysis.

## Assemblers

The `assemblers` package provides assembly libraries for all platforms and a general assembler
for all targets. The generic nature means that many syntaxes or preprocessing that are popular
on some platforms become available on all platforms. The x86 assemblers, for instance, perform
nasm-compatible assembly, which is also made available for the z80 target, even when that is
not the conventional path for that platform.

## Disassemblers

Similarly, the `disassemblers` package provides disassembly libraries for all platforms and a
general disassembler program for all targets. It similarly allows any traditional syntax for
a platform for any other platform.

## File Systems

This repository provides a set of primitive File and Directory handlers that it then extends
to offers methods of dealing with legacy file-system and archive formats. These tend to be a
useful abstraction over the different File APIs offered in Node or browser environments.

## Processing

On top of the File abstraction, there is a file processing and workflow library that offers
a method of abstracting away file transformations. For instance, the compilation pipeline is
one use-case for the Process class that can track assembly files, source code, and resulting
object files and executables for an efficient build system.
